# DGE Analysis of Particulate Matter effect on Mouse Model of Cardiac Failure

### Abstract

This study investigates the effects of particulate matter (PM) on gene expression in lung and left ventricle tissues in mouse models designed based on human congestive heart failure (CHF). Through normalization and analysis methods, 399 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are identified and clustered to understand expression patterns and biological implications. The resulting heatmaps reveal significant and, interestingly, contrasting patterns in gene expression. One cluster illustrates an upregulation in PBS in lung tissue whereas the other has upregulation in PM. GO-term analysis revealed that the top GO-term analysis ranging from the top two clusters were, cellular regulation, gland morphogenesis, and reproductive process regulation. Despite not directly relating to cardiac function and/or the lung function, these GO-terms imply that particulate matter affects more facets of the body than the two formerly mentioned. As a result, the analysis shows that PM is most likely able to hinder fundamental cellular activities and cause developmental changes. The offers insights into potential therapeutic targets for mitigating the effects of air pollution on vulnerable populations with CHF. This study is instrumental in understanding why individuals with CHF are particularly vulnerable to PM and brings to attention a larger public health concern—the substantive detrimental effects of air pollution.
